Next up we have three more operators that are extremely useful.
You'll see them all the time.
They're called logical operators and they're a bit different than what we've seen so far.
They kind of modify other boolean expressions.
So we've been writing conditionals that have a single expression inside of them like if x is less than
10 that's it or if password dot length is greater than or equal to six.
And we can get by doing that.
But sometimes we want to write more complex expressions instead of these parents.
And that's where these three operators come in.
They might look a little funky if you're new to programming entirely.
The three operators are called and or and not in the first one we'll take a look at who's called End
and is created or written using two ampersand in a row.
One ampersand is not going to cut it.
We need two of them.
And what it does is it takes two separate boolean expressions a left side and a right side they both
evaluate to either true or false and the entire thing this entire line will only be true if both sides
came out to be true.
So there's a left and a right.
And when you use and the whole expression is true only if both sides are true if one of them is false
the entire thing is false.
So here's a simple example.
These are hardcoded.
We know what the answers are is one less than or equal to four.
Yes that's true.
So we have true and and then is a equal to A.
That's true.
So we have true and true.
And that gives us true.
So in my console if I tried something like something really simple true and true gives me True true
and false gives me false because one side is false it doesn't matter if it's a left or the right.
If either is false the whole thing is considered false.
So false and false is going to be false just like false and true is also false.
So this is kind of useless other than just teaching how it works.
Usually we have expressions like well this is still very silly but is one lesson or equal to two and
five equals five.
Well this part's true.
This part is true.
The whole thing is true.
So that's the basics of.
And in a vacuum without a conditional without realistic conditions you have two sides.
Both sides have to be true for the whole thing to be true.
So something like this is false because ABC dot link is three but one plus one is not equal to four
one plus one is two.
That is not four.
So the whole thing is false.
So here is a better example of when you would use something like this.
Back when we were writing our first password checking example a couple sections or a couple of videos
ago we had this right here.
We were checking if password length is greater than or equal to six.
And if it was we were checking if it contained a spacer if it did not contain a space.
So in order to get a valid password we had two things that needed to happen.
It had to be six characters or more and it could not include space.
So we can achieve that logic by nesting two Fs or we can combine them into one statement like I have
right here.
This is only true.
This entire line right here is only true if password length is greater than or equal to six and password
but index of space is equal to negative 1.
So we could try that out.
We'll do something similar.
We might tweak it just a bit.
So we'll have password.
We'll set it equal to chicken.
Gal and then we'll write our conditional.
So if password dot length is greater than or equal to let's go with eight this time and password dot
index of
I'll zoom out a bit.
Password.
Index of space is equal to negative one which means it does not exist in that password string.
Then we'll counsel that log.
Valid password.
Otherwise we'll console that log invalid password
cool.
So we now have two pieces of logic combined into one statement.
This entire thing has to be true in order to get a valid password.
And I think our example we have does give us a valid password if we added a space and now we get invalid
because this portion is false.
So if all we need is a simple yes it's valid or no it's invalid.
And this works great but if we compare that to what we had earlier we actually had specific feedback
that said password cannot include spaces vs. password is too short.
Right now we just have yes or no valid or invalid and that's shorter.
It's easier to look at but if you need specific specific breakdown you need to differentiate between
each piece.
Then you probably want to nest.
You don't want to have a boolean and but if you just need two things to be true or you can even do more
than two you can combine multiple ends together and chain them.
It just gets quite long for a single line.
Anyway let's take a look at one more example.
Another common use case for end is to check if a number is within a specified range.
So let's say we're asking a user to guess or to pick a number from 1 to 10 and we want to make sure
it's between 1 and 10.
So we'll define that num.
Let's set it to 3 to start and we'll check if num is greater than or equal to 1 at eleven.
That's one part but that's not it.
Because we could have ninety nine that's greater than or equal to 1.
So we also add in our and num is less than or equal to 10.
We could also rewrite this as less than 11 although that would allow somebody to have ten point three.
So we can't assume that it's going to be a whole number.
So I'm going to go back to less than or equal to 10.
So this is now saying if a number is greater than or equal to 1 and less than or equal to 10.
Essentially if it's between 1 and 10 then that's a valid guess.
Consider log number is between 1 and 10.
So here we go.
I've just flushed it out with our else and a console log.
If we tested out or commented out the original code and refresh we get number is between 1 and 10.
We change it to 30.
It doesn't work if we change it to 1.
Does it work.
Yes.
Number is between 1 and 10.
And so on.
So that's another situation where you can use and it comes up all the time.
Often you have multiple conditions you need to check for in order to run code you can nest things but
sometimes it makes sense to put them together using boolean and or logical and.